      Important Notes, Facts, Resources, and Devices
                 of EIS Murphy System
                         Ted Greene 1977-10-07 & 08

        Horizontal Composition Based on Equal Intervals (12)

1)     A simplified and highly accurate method of counting, or spacing, all of the
       horizontal and vertical intervals used in modern music.
2)     In the advanced theory section it becomes a complete Equal Interval System
       involving all intervals, vertical as well as horizontal, in all possible
       combinations.
3)     There is no key as such, all Root tones being of equal importance, but we can
       have a tonal center (if required) which will serve the same general purpose.
4)     For the most part, the structural design of this system consists of Horizontal
       Patterns written in equal intervals, using various Root lines as a bass.
5)     We learn by playing and listening, comparing and analyzing, and checking
       and rechecking against the previous lessons. Play every note over and over
       again, carefully observing where each and every tone originates and the
       direction it takes (on a horizontal plane) in progressing to the following tones.
6)     When several Root tones appear in sequence, they are called Progressions.
       p.26  the term progression refers only to the horizontal movement of the
       Root tones (in the bass).
7)     The Perfect Fifth (diatonic interval) is treated as an Octave Position of a
       fourth.
8)     Although we use Equal Intervals in the bass with our Root tones, the scales
       employed in the treble are based on the Natural Major scale which has the
       diatonic intervals.
9)     Harmony is a set of tones from any one scale sounded simultaneously. All
       chords are built on certain intervals belonging to the various scales.
10)    We use a Two-Octave Scale when we wish to build chords.
11)    Vertically, this system follows as closely as possible the spacing of the
       intervals found in the overtone series. To get the vertical sounds needed we
       use our scales as a basis.
12)    The first section of the course is in Equal Intervals only in the horizontal
       relation of the tones (Root tones). Vertically, it is based on a greatly
       expanded 7-tone system.
13)    If we divide the overtone series into 5 octaves, we see the following:
       1st octave contains: the fundamental and its octave position
       2nd octave contains: a Root and a 5th
       3rd octave contains: 1, 3, 5, -7  called Chord Tones
       4th octave contains: 1, 2, 3, 4+, 5, 6, -7  called Scale Tones
       5th octave contains: 1, 2, 3, 4+, 5, 6, -7  called Scale Tones
“Important Notes, Facts, Resources, and Devices of EIS Murphy System” — Ted Greene, 1977-10-07, 08   page 2


14)             Book II: System of Progressions – “We must start somewhere, so we select
                lines which give us all the vertical structures known to conventional students
                by “chord names.” starting with Open and Close Triads (major and minor
                triads).
15)             Equal Interval Theory: “One line at a time written Horizontally in Equal
                Intervals.”
16)             At the heart of this course is “the motion of the horizontal lines resulting from
                the voice-leading plus the non-chord tones. This creates little fragments of
                Melody which are tossed about among the various parts in a sort of
                contrapuntal fashion. As the course of study progresses, these horizontal
                lines become longer and more intricate, and the harmonies more complex and
                of increasing interest. Our Final Goal is to be able to weave horizontal lines
                from all the parts together (contrapuntal, or otherwise) into a complete and
                perfectly organized ensemble.
17)             Non-Chord Tones (NCT’s) do not affect the Voice-Leading (VL) as they are
                placed between two chord tones. (p.26). (NCT substitute for or alter the
                chord tones as shown on p.23.
18)             Bass in Motion: Descending  use diatonic motion on p.5 (E7), EIS on all
                other ascending: likewise, but last tone in bar is Root tone except for E2^.
                The range limit can be extended when the bass is in motion (bass solo). The
                movement of the bass through the ascending progressions is exactly the
                opposite of the descending progressions.
                Everything in this course is reversable.
19)             The method of study we employ causes us to use the bar line as an Integrating
                Force. That is, we do not have to worry about such technical problems as
                Voice-leading, Root progressions, etc., except when we cross the bar line.
                Everything contained in 1 bar, such as the scale, the chord, or the alterations
                (NCT’s) are based on a single Root Tone. When we cross the bar line,
                everything changes as it is then based on a new and different Root tone. This
                is our basic theory (but not true for actual composition).
20)             In E5, E4, E3, and E6, the bass notes may be in any order of appearance you
                wish between Root tones.
21)             Elision: We may leave out any intervals in the bass not necessary to our
                pattern or which do not conform to the metric considerations present in the
                treble.
22)             Change of Position (C.O.P.) (the treble changing position): Use voice-
                leading when you cross the bar.
23)             If no tone is held over (in the same voice) from one chord to another, we have
                a Substitute Position (S.P.)  This is necessary sometimes when crossing the
                bas to keep a line going.
24)             Mark everything (it will come in handy for reference later).
“Important Notes, Facts, Resources, and Devices of EIS Murphy System” — Ted Greene, 1977-10-07, 08   page 3


25)             Bass and Treble Motion Combined: The bass may move and the treble
                change position at the same time.
26)             Substitute Tones (ST’s): Can replace chord tones. Example: 6 for 5; 4 for 3; 2
                for 1. When Substitute Tones appear first and resolve back to the chord
                tones, we refer to them as Leading Tones. If the chord tones appear first and
                the ST’s follow, then we refer to them as Passing Tones (PT).
27)             A) Passing Thirds, and B) Passing 5ths in the Bass: are inserted between
                any two tonics. For Passing 3rds, the Root Tone must appear 1st at all times,
                but not so for Passing 5ths.
                C) Passing 3rds & 5ths may be combined but if the 3rd is ever sounded at
                the same time (metrically) as the Treble Structure, then the Root or 5th must
                be doubled in the Treble (and the 3rd omitted). The Passing 3rds & 5ths will
                be referred to as the “Chord Tones.”
                D) Passing 3rds & 5ths may be combined with Equal Intervals used in the
                bass (on pp 32 & 33).
                E) Both the “Chord Tones” and the “Equal Intervals” referred to above may
                be combined with Leading Tones and Passing Tones (2 to 1, 4 to 3
                                                                       1 to 2, 3 to 4)
                F) All Bass Tones may be repeated an Octave Higher or Lower.
                                                                        (Example: T 8-3 5)
                G) Watch out for Parallel Octaves between bass and any note in Treble.
28)             The Six-Four chord is a separate chord with Root in the bass in this system.
                The resolution of the “unstable” sound is 6  5
                                                          4  3 or reverse (and either 5 or 6
                in minor). 6 and 4 are Substitute Tones here.
